Review suggestions: wording, Table 1, structure, and consistency (#175)
myyoda/principles-paper: main.tex

Data-driven research depends on specific versions of datasets, software, and computational environments, together with a record of how they were used to produce results.
We adopt the term \textbf{research object} to denote a collection of data, code, and metadata that together represent the research as a complete unit.

> It is common for the components of a research object to be organized independently with code in one repository, data on a shared drive, environment setup in a wiki page, and provenance (the record of how results were produced) in a lab notebook.

Reviewer: Do we really need to explain this? records are mentioned two lines above so this gets a bit duplicated/redundant

Note we aren't formally defining it this early anyway, just referring to it as the abstract word/concept

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is common for the components of a research object to be organized independently with code in one repository, data on a shared drive, environment setup in a wiki page, and provenance in a lab notebook.
```

Reviewer 2: Agree, its ok to use it colloquially before formal definition.

For example, persistent identifiers serve both Findability and Tracking but accent different aspects.
FAIR emphasizes discovery and interoperability across repositories, while STAMPED emphasizes improving the operational maturity of scientific workflows in day-to-day research practice.

> Many researchers already employ practices that address these operational properties, such as version control, containerized environments, organized project directories, and documented analysis steps.

Reviewer: "organized" does not imply "structured" in the same sense

Perhaps "well-organized"?

Reviewer 2: IMO prefer structured, but i dont have a strong opinion. 

```suggestion
Many researchers already employ practices that address these operational properties, such as version control, containerized environments, structured project directories, and documented analysis steps.
```

Here we provide that vocabulary by introducing seven principles which articulate how Self-contained, Tracked, Actionable, Modular, Portable, Ephemeral, and Distributable (STAMPED) a research object is, thus describing its operational maturity.
These originate from both the YODA Principles\cite{hanke_yoda_2018}, as well as VAMP\cite{hanke_what_2023}.
Rather than a compliance threshold, each STAMPED principle is a spectrum from a practical minimum---often what researchers are already doing---to an aspirational ideal.
A researcher who stores everything under one project directory, version-controls analysis scripts, and documents how to run them is already meeting the practical minimum for Self-containment, Tracking, and Actionability.
As complexity grows, such as for multi-institutional collaborations with heterogeneous workflows spanning platforms enforcing long-term reproducibility, these same principles guide researchers toward more rigorous practices without requiring wholesale adoption of new tools.

> STAMPED provides a descriptive vocabulary and a framework for evaluation that can incrementally improve the operational properties of research objects towards enhanced rigor, reproducibility, reusability, transparency, and efficiency.

Reviewer: How do you think it influences transparency?

Reviewer 2: I agree it improves transparency, ie, the commits tell the story. I'll keep this in.

The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
We first present the seven STAMPED principles, each with formal requirements, a motivating rationale, and a spectrum from practical minimum to aspirational ideal.
We then provide a checklist for self-assessment, a survey of enabling tools, and examples of real-world adoption.

> Finally, we situate STAMPED within the broader landscape of convergent practices in data-driven science and outline future directions.

Reviewer: Ehhh I would lean to keep this out unless editor/reviewer at specific journal wants it; they often have their own table of contents format

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

This is formal, and may become necessary. But for now I also prefer to leave out for brevity.

> \anchoredsection{principles}{The STAMPED Principles}

Reviewer: As mentioned in the issue (why raise issue beforehand if not letting it inform the PR?), I think we may need to keep this for current submission target

If we make a web-version (HTML export) for the website we would certainly keep this in mind, but this repo is specifically for the LaTeX draft

```suggestion
\anchoredsection{comments}{Comments}
```

Reviewer: Seems as @yarikoptic said this may be treated not as the 'direct' submission template then...

Hope we remember when the time comes then, so I guess we will have duplicates of this document per submission?

Reviewer 2: Discussed in person. Comments is required for utlimate submission target but we are cool with this for the pre-print, so keeping this suggestion.

\hline
\textbf{Letter} & \textbf{Principle} & \textbf{Description} \\
\hline
S & Self-containment & A research object contains all modules and components needed to understand and reproduce its results, without relying on external resources. \\
T & Tracking & Every component's identity and provenance are recorded and version-controlled. \\
A & Actionability & The research object provides sufficient information to carry out all procedures needed to obtain and reproduce its content. \\
M & Modularity & The research object is organized into independent, reusable modules with explicit boundaries. \\
P & Portability & The research object can be moved to different host systems while retaining its STAMPED properties. \\
E & Ephemerality & Procedural execution can be performed within a throwaway environment. \\

> D & Distributability & All modules and procedures are shareable with others in a persistent state. \\

Reviewer: @just-meng Goodness, I think you should split this off into a separate PR

We spent so many hours getting the phrasing to a point we liked, so it is not just simple text rewording as in the rest of the manuscript

I'd say revert this on this PR

Reviewer 2: Agree with cody on this one. This matured over a long time so I hesitate to make such a dramatic change now right before submission for pre-print. Howver looking at what we have it has become a bit dense and your phrases are easier to read so please do add this to a follow-up PR where we can get into the weeds.

```suggestion
S & Self-containment & A research object is a complete retrieval unit; it can be obtained and understood in its intended scope without needing to reference external resources. \\
T & Tracking & The state and provenance of all components is recorded. \\
A & Actionability & Research object contains machine-actionable information to carry out procedures to obtain or reproduce content. \\
M & Modularity & All modules are independent and composable. \\
P & Portability & Research object could be moved to different environments while retaining its STAMPED properties. \\
E & Ephemerality & Procedural execution is performed within a throwaway environment. \\
D & Distributability & All modules and procedures are shareable externally in a persistent state. \\
```

At the ideal end, every reference is precise enough that retrieval is unambiguous; how to achieve that precision is the concern of Tracking~(T) and Distributability~(D).

Self-containment is the foundation upon which the remaining STAMPED principles are built.

> Tracking~(T), Actionability~(A), Modularity~(M), Portability~(P), Ephemerality~(E), and Distributability~(D) each address a different aspect of how that content is structured, versioned, and shared---but none are meaningful without first establishing what is inside it.

Reviewer: I don't believe Actionable or Ephemeral address the boundaries or organization

Reviewer: [they are more abstracted as operational concepts]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tracking~(T), Modularity~(M), Portability~(P), and Distributability~(D) each address a different aspect of how that boundary is organized, versioned, and shared---but none are meaningful without first establishing what is inside it.
```
THis deliberately doesnt include all principles.

\anchoredsubsection{tracking}{Tracking}

\begin{itemize}
    \item \textbf{T.1}: Persistent content identification MUST be recorded for all components.
    \item \textbf{T.2}: Provenance of all modifications MUST be recorded.
    \item \textbf{T.3}: All components SHOULD be tracked using the same content-addressed version control system.
    \item \textbf{T.4}: Code-driven provenance SHOULD be recorded programmatically and MUST include the versions of
    all components involved.
\end{itemize}

> A Self-contained~(S) research object gathers everything needed in one place, but without a record of how each component arrived at its current state, reproducing a prior result becomes guesswork.

Reviewer: Perhaps move this to the following sentence so that we start with the main problem (independent of application of previous principle)

Research data and code change constantly during a project, and each change compounds the difficulty of reconstructing any previous state, such as which version of a dataset was used for a particular analysis, what parameters were set, and what code produced a given figure.
Tracking addresses two concerns: 1) the identity of each component and its exact state at a point in time, and 2) \textbf{provenance}, the recorded history of the actions by which identities produced or modified it.

> These are often managed separately, which makes reproducing and validating past work harder.

Reviewer: We already mention reproducibility so many times, to add it one more - does it really add value?

A part of validating _can be_ reproducing, after all. Perhaps that doesn't need to be specified

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These are often managed separately, which makes validating past work harder.
```

This distinction matters; two datasets labeled ``version 1.0'' by different labs are ambiguous whereas two datasets with identical content hashes are provably identical.
Version control commits also capture basic provenance of who made the change, when, and a description of why.
This unifies identity and provenance in a single system and also provides a safety net since any change can be reverted and any prior state restored, making it easier to modify and experiment.
For tracking to be effective, all components of the research object must be under version control: code, data, environment definitions, and configuration.

Traditional version control is designed for code and other text files, but research objects often include large binary datasets, container images, and other assets that do not fit this model.
Compatible tools such as git-annex, DataLad\cite{halchenko_datalad_2021}, or DVC\cite{ruslan_kuprieiev_dvc_2026} extend content-addressed tracking to these components, ensuring that all parts of the research object are managed under the same system.

Toward the ideal end, provenance is captured programmatically by tooling rather than by manual annotation.

> Each computational step should be recorded in terms of exactly what command was executed and what inputs were consumed, producing richer and more reliable records than a human would typically write.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each computational step should record exactly what command was executed and what inputs were consumed, producing richer and more reliable records than a human would typically write.
```

I defer to @asmacdo or @yarikoptic but overall we have fought long and hard to be concise as often as possible, so adding more words here in general, I am mostly against.

Here specifically I do not think anything is gained

Reviewer 2: I see why this sounds awkward. However the computational step *can* be the thing that records itself. Ie `datalad run thestep.sh` is itself a computational step. We are talking about the ideal end at this point, so it should all be automatic.

Reviewer: WLOG you can also use something like pyspy dumping to stdout to same or greater effect ;) [an external process monitoring the main one]

At the ideal end, every reference is precise enough that retrieval is unambiguous; how to achieve that precision is the concern of Tracking~(T) and Distributability~(D).

Self-containment is the foundation upon which the remaining STAMPED principles are built.
Tracking~(T), Actionability~(A), Modularity~(M), Portability~(P), Ephemerality~(E), and Distributability~(D) each address a different aspect of how that content is structured, versioned, and shared---but none are meaningful without first establishing what is inside it.

\anchoredsubsection{tracking}{Tracking}

\begin{itemize}
    \item \textbf{T.1}: Persistent content identification MUST be recorded for all components.
    \item \textbf{T.2}: Provenance of all modifications MUST be recorded.

>     \item \textbf{T.3}: All components SHOULD be tracked using the same content-addressed version control system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    \item \textbf{T.2}: All components SHOULD be tracked using the same content-addressed version control system.
    \item \textbf{T.3}: Provenance of all modifications MUST be recorded.
```
I see why you like that order better, I'd be fine with it, but we reference these elsewhere (in other repos too), I dont think its worth the followups/risk of missing one.

Reviewer: I was fine with keeping this, the other repos will be updated after the fact (already open issues for this)

Reviewer: Something to check within this text: do we exclusively refer to those 'codes' anywhere?

Reviewer 2: Also if we add new principles later, we dont want to be forced to renumber the existing ones, so its ok that they dont follow a specific order.

    \item \textbf{T.4}: Code-driven provenance SHOULD be recorded programmatically and MUST include the versions of all components involved.
\end{itemize}

A Self-contained~(S) research object gathers everything needed in one place, but without a record of how each component arrived at its current state, reproducing a prior result becomes guesswork.

> Research data and code change constantly during a project, and each change compounds the difficulty of reconstructing any previous state, such as which version of a dataset was used for a particular analysis, what parameters were set, and what code produced a given figure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Research data and code change constantly during a project, and each change compounds the difficulty of reconstructing any previous state, such as which version of a dataset was used for a particular analysis, what parameters were set, and what code produced a given figure.
A Self-contained~(S) research object gathers everything needed in one place, but without a record of how each component arrived at its current state, reproducing a prior result becomes guesswork.
```

    \item \textbf{M.3}: Each module's license SHOULD be declared independently and checked for compatibility at the boundaries where modules are combined
\end{itemize}

> A research object may be Self-contained~(S) and Tracked~(T), yet when all components are interleaved in a single monolithic directory, updating one part risks breaking another, reusing a component requires extracting it by hand, and collaborators must navigate the entire object to find what they need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A research object may be Self-contained~(S) and Tracked~(T), yet when all components are interleaved in a single monolithic directory, updating one part risks breaking another.
Reusing a component requires extracting it by hand, and collaborators must navigate the entire object to find what they need.
```

    \item \textbf{M.3}: Each module's license SHOULD be declared independently and checked for compatibility at the boundaries where modules are combined
\end{itemize}

> A research object may be Self-contained~(S) and Tracked~(T), yet when all components are interleaved in a single monolithic directory, updating one part risks breaking another, reusing a component requires extracting it by hand, and collaborators must navigate the entire object to find what they need.

Reviewer: Very long sentence to read; I'd suggest trying to break it up a bit

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A research object may be Self-contained~(S) and Tracked~(T), yet when all components are interleaved in a single monolithic directory, it can be fragile and difficult to navigate.
```

\begin{itemize}[noitemsep,topsep=0pt,leftmargin=*]
  \item computation can occur in temporary, disposable environments
  \item results are reproducible without knowledge of previous runs

>   \item the environment is rebuilt from its specification before each execution, ensuring no undocumented state carries over

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \item the environment is rebuilt from its specification before each execution, ensuring no undocumented state from the host system carries over
```

if @asmacdo likes to keep the source context for the state

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  \item the environment is rebuilt from its specification before each execution, ensuring no reliance on undocumented state
```
I think undocumented state is fine here actually, but "carries over" implies between runs, which is a concern, but there could also be undocumented state just inherited from the original system.

\end{itemize} \\
\hline
\textbf{To be Distributable:} &
\begin{itemize}[noitemsep,topsep=0pt,leftmargin=*]
  \item all modules and components can be shared in a persistent, retrievable state
  \item dependencies are frozen or pinned to specific versions across systems

>   \item recipients can verify that what they obtained matches the intended state (e.g., via content-addressed identifiers)

Reviewer: These say slightly different things

The original is about 3rd parties getting something as intended by the 1st party

The suggestion is about the 3rd party verifying the thing obtained as matching

Crucially, the original does not place any assumption of responsibility; it merely states the possibility

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  \item the Research Object can be obtained by others in the same state as intended
```

For example, container technologies such as Docker or Singularity serve Portability by providing OS-level isolation from explicit environment specifications, enable Ephemerality~(E) by disposing per-execution environments, and facilitate Distributability~(D) by producing frozen, shareable artifacts.
Similarly, version control systems such as Git underpin both Tracking (content-addressed identification and change history) and Self-containment (gathering all components under a single root).

> In practice, Self-containing~(S) all data by storing it directly within the research object may be undesired or prohibitive due to size, licensing, or privacy concerns, creating a tension with Tracking~(T), which requires that every component be identified and versioned.

Reviewer: Again, long sentence. We favor stylistically breaking this up to be more digestible

```suggestion
In practice, Self-containing~(S) all data by storing it directly within the research object may be undesired or prohibitive due to size, licensing, or privacy concerns.
This creates a tension with Tracking~(T), which requires that every component be identified and versioned.
```

Several research projects have already adopted and documented the YODA principles (the predecessor to STAMPED) demonstrating practical utility across domains.

\textbf{BIDS Standard Evolution}: A significant validation of the ``do not look up'' principle occurred within the Brain Imaging Data Structure (BIDS)\cite{gorgolewski_brain_2016} community.

> Originally, the BIDS specification nested derived data under \texttt{derivatives/} within the original raw dataset, creating upward dependencies that violated Modularity~(M) and, as a consequence, Portability~(P).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Originally, the BIDS specification nested derived data under \texttt{derivatives/} within the original raw dataset, creating upward dependencies that violated Self-containment~(S) and Modularity~(M), which broke Portability~(P).
```
